DAI-XERRETEN, THE LIONESS, AND THE CHILDREN.

Dai-Xerreten,126 formerly, when the Lioness was at the water, dipping up,127 (when) she had gone to dip128 up water there, Dai-Xerreten felt that the Lioness was the one who had gathered together the people's children, because the Lioness felt that she was an invalid on account of (her) chest; therefore, she gathered together the people's children, that the children might live with her, that the children might work for her; for, she was an invalid, and she could not do hard work.

Therefore, Dai-Xerreten went to her house, when she was dipping up water. Dai-Xerreten went in her absence to the house, Dai-Xerreten went to the children, at the house. Dai- Xerreten went to the house reaching the children. Dai-Xerreten sat down. And Dai-Xerreten said: "O children sitting here! The fire of your people is that which is at the top of the ravine which comes down from the top (of the hill)." Therefore, two children arose, they went away to their own people.

Dai-Xerreten again said: "O children sitting here! The fire of your people is that which is below the top of the ravine which comes down on this side (of the hill)." And three children129 thus went, while they went away to their own people.

And he again said: "O little child sitting here! Thy people's fire is that which is below the top of the ravine which comes down on this side (of the hill)." And the child arose, it thus went, while the child went away to its own people.
 
He again said: "O children sitting here! The fire of your people is that which is below130 the top of the ravine131 which comes down on this side (of the hill)." And two children arose, they thus went away, while they went away to their own people.

And he again said: "O children sitting here! Your people's fire is that which is at the top. of the ravine which comes down from the top (of the hill)." And two children arose, they thus went away.

And he again said: "O children sitting here! The fire of your people is that which is at the top of the ravine which comes down from the top (of the hill)." And three children arose, they thus went away; while they went away to their own people.

And he again said: "O children sitting here!132 The fire of your people is that which is at the top of the ravine which comes down from the top (of the hill)." And two children arose, they thus went away; while they went away to their own people; while Dai-Xerreten sat waiting for the Lioness.

And the Lioness came from the water, she thus returning came. She came along looking (at the house); she did not perceive the children. And she exclaimed: " Why do the children (stammering with rage) children children children, the children not do so to me? and the children do not play here, as they are wont to do? It must be this man who sits at the house; his head resembles Dai-Xerreten."133

And she became angry about it, when she perceived Dai-Xerreten.134 She exclaimed: "Dai-Xerreten indeed (?) sits here!" She walked up to the house. She exclaimed: "Where are my children?"135 And Dai-Xerreten said: Our children (they) are not." And the Lioness exclaimed: "Out on thee! leave off! thou must give me the children!" Dai-Xerreten said: "Our children (they) were not."

And the Lioness caught hold of his head. She exclaimed: "Xabbabbu"136 (growling) to the other one's head. And she exclaimed: " Oh! Oh dear! Oh dear! Oh dear! Oh dear! my teeth! This must be why this cursed(?) man's big head came to sit in front of my house!" While Dai-Xerreten said: "I told thee that our children they were not." The Lioness exclaimed: "Destruction! Thou hast been the one whose big head came to sit (here)." Our children137 (they) were not."

And he arose, he returned (home); while the Lioness sat in anger at her house; because he had come (and) taken away from her the children, who had been (living) peacefully with her; for she felt that she had done well towards the children; she did not a little love the children while she was doing so.